ON THIS EDITION FOR FEB. 8
ALLIANCE WITH DRUG COMPANIES
AND THE PENSION PERIL OF
FINANCIALLY STRAPPED CITIE
STRUGGLES TO FULFILL ITS
OBLIGATIONS TO RETIRED PUBLI
EMPLOYEES.
>> WE COULD GO BANKRUPT AGAIN.
>> I WORKED ALMOST 30 YEARS.
I WAS PROMISED SOMETHING WHEN
RETIRED.
>> AND UNEMPLOYMENT.
LOOKING BEHIND THE LATES
NUMBERS NEXT ON PBS NEWS HOU
WEEKEND.
>>> GOOD EVENING
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
ATTORNEY GENERAL ERIC HOLDER
MOVED TODAY TO EXTEND THE SAME
RIGHTS TO MARRIED SAME-SEX
COUPLES AT HETEROSEXUAL COUPLES.
SAME SEX SPOUSES OF POLICE AND
FIREFIGHTERS KILLED IN THE LIN
OF DUTY WILL BE ELIGIBLE FOR
FEDERAL BENEFITS
THEY WILL NOT BE OFFERED T
OFFER TESTIMONY THAT COULD
IN
INCRIMINAL CRIMINAL NATURE THEIR
SPOUSES AND BUREAU OF PRISON
WILL OFFER THE SAME RIGHTS
IT CAME IN REMARKS AND WILL GO
IN TO EFFECT MONDAY.
NORTHERN CALIFORNIA IS FINALLY
GETTING RELIEF FROM THE EXTREM
DROUGHT.
METEOROLOGISTS SAY AS MUCH AS
INCHES OF RAIN COULD FALL IN THE
SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA MONDAY.
EVEN MORE RAIN IS EXPECTED NORTH
AND EAST OF THE CITY
BUT METEOROLOGISTS SAY IT WILL
TAKE SEVERAL MORE MAJOR STORMS
TO PUT A DEPARTMENT IN THE
DROUGHT WHICH THREATENS WATE
SUPPLIES TO BOTH AGRICULTURA
AND URBAN AREAS.
LAST YEAR WAS THE DRIEST EVE
RECORDED SINCE CALIFORNIA BECAME
A STATE IN 1850.
GOVERNOR BROWN DECLARED
DROUGHT EMERGENCY THREE YEAR
AGO.
>> TOYOTA IS CLOSE TO AN
AGREEMENT WITH THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT IN CONNECTION WIT
SUDDEN ACCELERATION.
THE ISSUE FIRST CAME TO LIGHT IN
2009 AFTER AN OFF DUTY
CALIFORNIA HIGHWAY PATROLMAN AND
HIS FAMILY WERE KILLED WHEN TH
LEXUS THEY WERE DRIVING CAREENED
OFF THE HIGHWAY AT AROUND 12
MILES PER HOUR
THE DRIVER HAD CALLED 911 SAYING
HE COULD NOT SLOW DOWN THE CAR
THE COMPANY IS FACING MORE THA
700 LAWSUITS OVER ACCELERATION
ISSUES
UNDER THE REPORTED SETTLEMENT,
THE COMPANY WHICH HAS NEVE
ADMITTED WRONGDOING, WOULD FAC
NO CRIMINAL CHARGES.
>>> AN AMERICAN MISSIONARY BEING
HELD IN NORTH KOREA HAS BEEN
SENT BACK TO A LABOR CAMP.
KENNETH BAE HAD BEEN
HOSPITALIZED AND THE STATE
DEPARTMENT CALLS ON NORTH KORE
TO GRANT AMNESTY
HE WAS SENTENCED TO 15 YEARS
HARD LABOR FOR RELIGIOUS
ACTIVITIES
>>> SOUTH KOREA HAS SCORED A
VICTORY OVER JAPAN IN VIRGINIA
LAWMAKERS THERE VOTED THIS WHEEK
TO REQUIRE SCHOOL TEXTBOOKS TO
REFER TO THE WATERS DIVIDING THE
TWO COUNTRIES AS THE EAST SEA.
AS WELL AS THE SEA OF JAPAN.
THE VOTE FOLLOWED INTENS
LOBBYING BY BOTH COUNTRIES
VIRGINIA HAS SOME 80,000 KOREA
AMERICANS WHICH IS FOUR TIMES AS
MANIES A JAPANESE MANIES
BUT THE STATE DOES MUCH MORE
BUSINESS WITH JAPAN THAN WIT
SOUTH KOREA.
>>> THERE WAS A DRAMATIC
INCREASE IN THE NUMBER O
CHILDREN KILLED AND WOUNDED IN
WAR RELATED INCIDENTS IN
AFGHANISTAN LAST YEAR.
A NEW UNITED NATIONS REPORT PUTS
THE NUMBER OF CASUALTIES AT MORE
THAN 1700 INCLUDING 561 DEATHS
ACCORDING TO THE REPORT, THE
WITHDRAWAL OF FOREIGN TROOPS AND
INCREASED TALIBAN ATTACKS ARE TO
BLAME FOR THE SPIKE IN DEATH
AND WOUNDED.
TURNING NOW TO SYRIA DESPITE
WHAT WAS TO HAVE BEEN A THRE
DAY CEASE FIRE, AN AID CONVO
CAME UNDER FIRE.
IT'S THE FIRST HUMANITARIA
MISSION THERE IN 18 MONTHS
AID WORKERS HAD TO SCRAMBLE FO
COVER.
MANY WERE EVACUATED SHOWIN
SIGNS OF MALNUTRITION.
>>> EARLIER THIS WEEK, TEN BIG
DRUG COMPANIES THAT RARELY SHARE
THEIR SECRETS AGREED TO WORK
TOGETHER WITH THE NATIONAL
INSTITUTES OF HEALTH
THEIR GOAL, FINDING CURES FOR
NUMBER OF MAJOR DISEASES
INCLUDING DIABETES AND
ALZHEIMER'S.
THE PROJECT WILL LAST FIVE
YEARS, COST $230 MILLION, AND AT
THE END, ALL THE FINDINGS WILL
BE FREE FOR ANYONE TO USE.
HERE TO HELP WILL US UNDERSTAN
IT ALL IS MONICA LANGLEY FRO
THE WALL STREET JOURNAL.
HAS ANYTHING LIKE THIS EVER BEEN
TRIED BEFORE ON THIS SCALE
>> NO, NOTHING HAS BEEN TRIED ON
THIS SCALE WITH THIS MAN
DISEASES
AND WITH THIS MUCH
COLLABORATION.
ALL IS THEY'RE GOING TO PUT AL
THEIR DISCOVERIES OUT TO THE
PUBLIC
SO THE BIG PHARMACEUTICA
COMPANIES OR THE LITTLEST STAR
UP WILL HAVE ACCESS AND CA
COMPETE.
>> ALMOST FOLLOWING STRAIGHT OUT
OF THE PLAY BOOK OF THE SOFTWARE
MODEL OF OPEN SOURCE
>> AND THIS IS WHAT IS UNUSUAL
THERE STARTED TO AN FEW MORE
COLLABORATIONS IN THE LAST FEW
YEARS, BUT NOTHING OF THIS
SCALE.
AND THIS ACTUALLY TOOK TWO YEARS
TO GET IT DONE
AND IT WAS VERY DIFFICULT.
THERE WERE A LOT OF SHARP ELBOWS
AND A LOT OF HURT FEELINGS ALONG
THE WAY.
AND NOT ALL THE DRUG COMPANIES
THAT PARTICIPATED ULTIMATELY
SIGNED UP.
BUT TEN BIG ONES DID AND THE
HOPE TO COME UP WITH SOM
BLOCKBUSTER DRUGS.
>> SO WHAT ARE THE SPECIFI
DISEASES AND HOW DO THEY NARRO
DOWN THE LIST OF WHAT TO TACKLE?
>> OKAY.
THAT'S A GOOD QUESTION
AT FIRST, THE HEAD OF THE NIH IS
FRANCIS COLLINS, AND HE IS THE
ONE WHO SEQUENCED -- OR WHO LE
THE HUMAN GENOME EXPERIMENT.
AND HE WANTED TO LIKE MAP AL
DISEASES
THAT WAS HIS GRAND IDEA.
AND THE DRUG COMPANIES WERE LIKE
ARE YOU CRAZY?
WE CAN'T THINK OF SOME BIG
THEORETICAL EXPERIMENT LIK
THAT
WE WANT SOMETHING THAT WILL GO
INTO OUR PIPELINE AND HELP U
MAKE MONEY
SO THEY LOOKED AT DISEASES WHA
PATIENTS REALLY NEEDED AND THE
CAME UP WITH ALZHEIMER'S
DIABETES, AND THEY ALSO CAME U
WITH TWO AUTOIMMUNE DISORDERS,
RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS AND LUPUS
SO THEY FOCUSED ON THOSE FOU
FOR THIS INITIAL FIVE YEAR
PROJECT.
>> SO LET'S TALK ABOUT THIS $230
MILLION.
PUT THAT IN PERSPECTIVE ABOU
HOW MUCH THESE COMPANIES WOULD
SPEND IF THEY WEREN'T PART O
THIS TRIAL
>> THIS IS PEANUTS TO BE HONES
WITH YOU FOR THE PHARMACEUTICA
COMPANIES.
BUT -- BECAUSE THEY SPEND LIKE
OVER 200 SOMETHING BILLION A
YEAR WORLDWIDE
BUT WHAT THEY'RE DOING HERE IS
SOMETHING MONEY CAN'T BUY.
THEY'RE -- THEY HAVE AGREED TO
GIVE THEIR BEST SCIENTISTS A LOT
OF THEIR TISSUE AND BLOO
SAMPLES AND ALL THEIR DATA FOR
THE PAST AND KRPTD CLINICA
TRIALS ON THESE FOUR DISEASE
WITHIN THE RESEARCH PLAN
AND BY WUTPUTTING ALL THIS
TOGETHER, THEY THINK THEY CA
COME UP WITH WAYS TO MAP DOE
HIS DISEASES THAT THEY HAVE BEEN
ABLE R UNABLE TO DO OF ALONE
>> HOW MUCH OF THIS IS JUS
FUNDING DRYING UP?
>> THAT'S TRUE
THE SCIENTIFIC COMPONENT I
THERE IS SO MUCH MORE SCIENTIFIC
INFORMATION NOW, THEY DON'T KNOW
WHICH MOLECULAR PATHWAYS T
FOLLOW
THE SECOND IS THE BUSINESS
REASON
THESE GUYS, THE PHARMACEUTICAL
EXECUTIVES TOLD ME IT TAKES TE
YEARS AND $1 BILLION TO GET ON
DRUG FROM DISCOVERY TO MARKET.
AND SO THEY ARE JUST, YOU KNOW
THEIR PIPELINES ARE DRYING UP,
GENERICS ARE COMING OUT, SO THEY
NEED HELP FINDING RIGHT DRUGS.
>> MONICA, THANKS SO MUCH.
>> MY PLEASURE
>>> WE CONTINUE OUR COVERAGE O
THE PENSION PERIL, THE SHORTFALL
IN FUNDING FOR RETIREMEN
BENEFITS
VALLEJO, CALIFORNIA WENT BUS
DURING THE GREAT RECESSION AFTER
A SERIES OF BUDGET CUTS EMERGE
FROM BANKRUPTCY THREE YEAR
LATER.
BUT NOW SOME FEAR HAVE A LAY
VALLEJO COULD FACE A SECON
BANKRUPTCY UNLESS THEY REDUC
WHAT THEY PAY THE RETIREES
HERE IS OUR REPORT
>> Reporter: BOB LEE HAS BEE
THROUGH MAJOR CHANGES OVER THE
PAST FEW YEARS
ON MOVED OUT TO THE COUNTRY A
P WENT INTO A NEW LINE OF WORK
HE BECAME THE PASTOR OF A CHURCH
WITH A SMALL CONGREGATION IN A
RURAL PART OF NAPA COUNTY,
CALIFORNIA
ABOUT 50 MILES NORTH OF SA
FRANCISCO.
HE'D ONLY BEEN A BELIEVER FOR
FEW YEARS WHEN HE DECIDED TO G
INTO THE MINISTRY.
BUT HE WAS CERTAIN THAT IT WAS
HIS CALLING AND THE CHANCE T
SERVE HIS COMMUNITY.
>> I'VE HAD A GOOD LIFE.
AND IF I CAN HELP SOMEONE ELSE
HAVE A BETTER LIFE, THAT'S WHA
LIFE IS ABOUT.
WHEN WE LEAVE HERE, WE DON'T
TAKE ANYTHING WITH US.
I DON'T TAKE MY RETIREMENT
BENEFITS, MY MEDICAL, UP IN OF
THOSE THINGS
>> Reporter: LEE COULD HAVE
NEW CAREER BECAUSE HE RETIRE
FROM HIS OLD ONE WITH BENEFITS
FOR NEARLY 30 YEAR, HE WAS A
POLICE OFFICER IN THE BAY AREA
HE WAS ABLE TO RETIRE AT 50 WITH
A PENSION AND FAMILY HEALT
INSURANCE BENEFITS WORTH A TOTAL
OF A LITTLE OVER $108,000
YEAR
>> I KNEW THAT I WASN'T GOING TO
HAVE TO COUNT ON A CHURCH SALARY
TO CARRY ME THROUGH MY
RETIREMENT, I WAS GOING TO
DEFEND ON MY LAW ENFORCEMENT
RETIREMENT TO DO THAT.
>> IT SOUNDS LIKE YOU HAD
PRETTY GOOD SENSE THAT WHEN YO
RETIRED, VALLEJO WOULD CONTINU
TO TAKE CARE OF YOU.
>> I KNEW THEY WERE GOING TO I
A CARE OF ME
THAT'S WHAT THEY SAID THEY WOULD
DO
>> Reporter: BUT THAT IS TAKIN
A TOLL ON THE CITY'S FINANCES.
REIREMENT BENEFITS WILL COST THE
CITY $21 MILLION IN THE CURREN
FISCAL YEAR.
NEARLY $4 MILLION MORE THAN TH
YEAR BEFORE.
TWO YEARS AGO, THEY ACCOUNTE
FOR 19% OF THE BUDGET.
THIS YEAR THEIR SHARE IS NEARL
26%.
FIVE YEARS FROM NOW, THE CIT
PROJECTS IT WILL BE ALMOST 30%
THAT IS BAD NEWS FOR A CITY WITH
A $5 MILLION BUDGET DEFICIT.
STEPHANIE GOMES FEELS LIKE SHE'S
WATCHING HISTORY REPEAT.
>> WE COULD GO BANKRUPT AGAIN.
THE FIRST ONE IS HARD ENOUGH
I CAN'T EVEN BEGIN TO IMAGINE
SECOND ONE
>> Reporter: GOMES HAD A FRONT
ROW SEAT ON THE CITY COUNCIL I
THE CITY NEVER RECOVERED FRO
THE BLOW IT TOOK IN 1996 WHE
THE SHIP YARD CLOSED AND
THOUSANDS OF RESIDENTS LOS
JOBS
THE ADDITIONAL BURDEN OF THE
RECESSION WAS TOO MUCH FOR THE
MUNICIPAL BUDGET
FOR GOMES, THE WORST PART OF THE
CRISIS WAS JUST BEFORE THE CIT
FILED FOR BANKRUPTCY
>> BECAUSE BEFORE IS WHEN YOU'RE
SCRAMBLING TRYING TO FIGURE OU
HOW NOT TO GO INTO BANKRUPTCY.
SO WE HAD TO CUT FIXING OU
ROAD, TRIMMING OUR TREES, HOUR
AT THE LIBRARY, YOU KNOW
ANYTHING AND EVERYTHING.
>> Reporter: THERE WAS ONE THING
THE CITY COULDN'T CUT.
PENSIONS
UNDER CALIFORNIA LAW, VALLEJ
WAS PROHIBITED FROM CUTTIN
THEM
PENSIONS COST THE CITY SO MUCH
BECAUSE IT PAYS IT WORKERS S
MUCH
THE FIFTH HIGHEST WAGES FO
MUNICIPAL EMPLOYEES IN THE
STATE.
AND THE HIGHEST WAMGS IN THE
CITY ARE PAID TO POLICE.
>> IN VALLEJO, WE PAID $150,000,
$175,000, $200,000, $300,000, SO
YOU HAVE PEOPLE RETIRING WIT
90% OF THAT.
>> Reporter: BOB LEE ARGUE
FIREFIGHTES AND POLICE OFFICES
EARN IT.
HE LOST TWO FRIENDS IN THE LIN
OF DUTY.
WHEN HE WAS GROWING UP, FE
CITIES HAD A PROBLEM WITH CRIME.
BUT WHEN CRACK COCAINE CAME TO
UP TO, THE CITY'S CRIME PRISON
GOT WORSE.
>> PEOPLE WERE CRYING OUT FO
SOMETHING TO BE DONE ABOUT THE
CRIME.
SO THE CITY STARTED PAYING MOR
FOR POLICE OFFICERS, THE
STARTED PROVIDING BETTER
BENEFITS TO ATTRACT GOOD
OFFICERS AND WE BUILT A VERY
GOOD POLICE DEPARTMENT, ONE THAT
WAS LOOKED UP TO BY MANY
AGENCIES IN THE STATE.
>> Reporter: LAST YEAR WHEN TH
CITY HAD TO CUT SPENDING AGAIN
TO DEAL WITH ITS $5 MILLIO
DEFICIT, THE COUNCIL TURNED TO
THE POLICE BUDGET.
LAST DECEMBER, THE COUNCIL
CHAMBERS FILLED UP WIT
RESIDENTS, POLICE IN UNIFORM AND
RETIRED COPS AS THE COUNCIL TOOK
UP A PROPOSAL TO CUT HEALTH CARE
BENEFITS FOR RETIRED POLICE BY
$2 MILLION A YEAR.
STEPHANIE GOMES AND THE REST O
THE COUNCIL LISTENED AS BOB LE
TOLD THEM THAT THE PROPOSAL WA
UNFAIR
>> THOSE OF YOU SITTING OU
HERE, YOU PICTURE YOURSELF
RETIRING 15, 20 YEARS FROM NOW
WITH WHAT YOU THOUGHT YOU WERE
GOING TO GET HAVING BEEN TAKEN
AWAY
>> Reporter: GOMES CAN EMPATHIZE
WITH THE POLICE.
THEIR DEPARTMENT WAS THE LAS
ONE HER HUSBAND WORK THIS HA
BEFORE HE RETIRED.
BUT SHE WANTED THE CUT TO BE HER
LAST MAJOR ACCOMPLISHMENT.
THE COUNCIL VOTED 6-0 TO MAK
THE CUT.
BOB LEE LOST THEIR INSURANCE
NOW THEY PAID A TOTAL OF $769
MONTH FOR THEMSELVES
>> I AM DISAPPOINTED AND
FRUSTRATED THAT THE CITY HAS
DONE THIS.
TO ME AND FOR OTHER RETIREES
THEY HAVE LET US DOWN.
AND IN SOME WAYS IT SEEMS LIKE
THEY HAVE TAKEN THE EASY ROUTE
TO FILL A MONETARY GAP B
CUTTING RETIREE BENEFITS
I WAS PROMISED SOMETHING WHEN
RETIRED.
I WORKED ALMOST 30 YEARS T
RECEIVE THAT AND I BASED MY LIFE
UPON IT.
>> WAS THERE ANYTHING ELSE THE
CITY OF VALLEJO COULD HAVE DON
AT THAT POINT?
WHERE COULD THEY HAVE CUT?
>> WHERE I THINK THEY SHOULD
HAVE STARTED TO MAKE CHANGES I
WITH THE CURRENT EMPLOYEES
THOSE PEOPLE STILL HAVE AN
OPPORTUNITY TO PLAN FOR THES
THINGS IN THE FUTURE
>> I GET THAT THEY PUT THEIR
LIFE ON THE LINE
MY HUSBAND WAS A POLICE CAPTAIN.
RETIRED AFTER 36 YEARS
I GET IT
BUT YOU CHOOSE THAT JOB.
BECAUSE YOU BELIEVE IN IT.
YOU CHOOSE IT BECAUSE OF
SERVICE.
AND YOU BELIEVE IN SERVING THE
PUBLIC
AND THE PUBLIC IS HURTING.
>> HOW FAR IS IT FAIR TO GO IN
CUTTING THAT, THOUGH
>> I WOULD CUT THE LEAST AMOUN
THAT WE COULD BECAUSE I AGRE
PEOPLE RETIRE AND THEY KIND OF
MAKE PLANS ON THAT
BUT WHAT ABOUT THE PROMISES TO
THE TAXPAYERS?
PEOPLE PAYING THESE PENSIONS
IT'S PROMISES TO A MANY AN
PROMISES TO A FEW.
AND IF WOULD HE ALL TOOK A
LITTLE BIT OF CUTS AND IF WE ALL
SHARED IN THAT PAIN, THEN IT
WOULDN'T HAVE TO BE SO GREAT
>> Reporter: THE CONFRONTATION
IN VALLEJO WAS PART OF A BREER
CONFLICT OVER THE COST OF TAKING
CARE OF RETIRE YEARS AND IT MA
BE COMING TO A LOT MORE.
>> IT'S A SYSTEMIC PROBLEM, LIKE
A VIRUS MAKING ITS WAY THROUGH
CALIFORNIA MUNICIPAL
GOVERNMENTS.
AND EVERYONE WILL GET HIT WITH
IT EVENTUALLY.
>> Reporter: JOE NATION IS A
PROFESSOR OF PUBLIC POLICY A
STANFORD
HE SEES CALIFORNIA'S MUNICIPAL
BUDGET CRIES IS AS A PREVIEW O
WORSE THINGS TO COME IN OTHE
STATES
>> IF YOU LOOK AT THE PNKS
STATUS OF CALIFORNIA OF TH
PENSION SYSTEMS HERE VERSUS TH
REST OF THE COUNTRY, WE'RE NOT
IN THE WORST SHAPE
WE'RE PROBABLY ABOUT THE MIDDL
OF THE PACT.
>> Reporter: HE BELIEVES THAT AS
LONG AS THE COST OF PENSIONS
KEEPS RISING, CITIES ALL OVE
THE COUNTRY WILL HAVE TO EITHE
RAISE TAXES OR CUT OTHER PARTS
OF THE BUDGET.
>> AND THAT IS THE PATH PEOPLE
ARE ON RIGHT NOW
THE NUMBERS ARE STAGGERING
>> Reporter: IN CALIFORNIA, TH
COST OF PENSIONS IS RISING
FASTER THAN THAT OF POLICE AND
FIRE DEPARTMENTS YOU CAN
SANITATION, EDUCATION, O
ANYTHING ELSE IN MUNICIPAL
BUDGETS.
STEPHANIE GOMES SEES NO WAY FO
CITIES TO REIN IN THAT COS
BECAUSE THEY WOULD HAVE TO CUT
PENSIONS TO DO IT.
AND SINCE THAT'S PROHIBITE
UNDER CALIFORNIA LAW, THEY'R
LIKELY TO GO BANKRUPTCY.
SHE'S BEEN CAMPAIGNING TO CHANGE
THAT LAW, TO GIVE CITIES THE
RIGHT TO NEGOTIATE FOR PENSION
CUTS
SHE AND OTHER SUPPORTERS HOPE TO
GET THE INITIATIVE ON TO THE
BALLOT IN THE STATEWIDE SLEEKS
THAT CALIFORNIA VOTERS CAN
DECIDE
>> I'M GOING TO PAY --
>> Reporter: SHE'S ALSO RUNNIN
AN ANTI-GRAFFITI CAMPAIGN SH
AND HER HUSBAND STARTED.
SHE SEES A LOT OF OTHE
RESIDENTS GETTING TOGETHER TO DO
THINGS THE CITY USED TO DO WHICH
COULD BE A GOOD SIGN FOR
VALLEJO'S FUTURE
AND ON THAT POINT, BOB LEE
AGREES WITH HER.
THERE IS A STORY LIKE THAT I
THE BIBLE.
>> IN THE BOOK OF ACTS AFTER
CHRIST WENT BACK TO HEAVEN, HE
LEFT THE PEOPLE WITH A MANDATE
HE SAID LOVE GOD, LOVE YOU
NEIGHBORS.
AND THAT IS WHAT THE PEOPLE DID.
THEY SET THEIR DIFFERENCES
ASIDE, THEY CAME TOGETHER TO
MAKE A BETTER FUTURE FOR
EVERYONE
AND I THINK THAT YOU CAN D
THAT
BUT IT TAKES A LOT OF HARD WOR
FOR PEOPLE TO BE WILLING TO SE
ASIDE THINGS THAT THEY
OFTENTIMES HOLD DEARLY
>> SFIND OUT WHICH CITIES IN THE
UNITED STATES HAVE DECLARE
BANKRUPTCY
SEE OUR MAP AT NEW
HOUR.PBS.ORG
>>> WE WANTED TO FOLLOW UP
TONIGHT ON YESTERDAY'S MONTHLY
UNEMPLOYMENT REPORT.
OUR FOCUS THIS EVENING,
PERSISTENT PROBLEM, HOW IT
IMPACTS YOUNG PEOPLE AND PEOPL
OF COLOR
WE HAVE A SENIOR ECONOMIST WIT
US FROM BLOOMBERG.
WHEN YOU YOU LOOK UNDER TH
HOOD, IT'S WORSE DEPENDING O
WHERE YOU LOOK
LET'S LOOK AT RACE
WHITE AMERICANS HAVE A
UNEMPLOYMENT RATE OF ABOUT 5.7%.
AFRICAN AMERICANS ARE MORE THA
TWICE THAT FIGURE AT 12.1%
ANY PRIMARY CAUSES
>> WELL, YOU SEE THAT DOUBLING
OF THE UNEMPLOYMENT RATE BETWEEN
BLACKS AND WHITES AT EVERY
EDUCATIONAL LEVEL AND IT'S
PARTICULARLY DRAMATIC WHEN YOU
LOOK AT THE YOUTH POPULATION
THERE ARE SEVERAL REASONS.
ONE, THE FACT THAT BLACK
GRADUATE AT LOWER LEVELS THA
WHITES DO.
SO WE KNOW COLLEGE EDUCATION I
A HUGE FACTOR IN DETERMINING THE
LEVEL OF UNEMPLOYMENT.
SO THAT EMPLOYMENT DISPARITY I
A BIG DRIVER
SECONDLY, YOUTH AN
AFRICAN-AMERICAN YOUTH TEND TO
BE EMPLOYED IN SECTORS THAT AR
VERY BUSINESS CYCLE SENSITIVE.
SO WHEN THE GENERAL ECONOMY IS
DOING BAD, THAT SECTOR GET
WORSE AND IT'S WORSE FOR THI
PARTICULAR POPULATION.
>> SO WHEN WE LOOK A
UNEMPLOYMENT NUMBERS BY AGE,
IT'S EVEN WORSE AS YOU'R
POINTING OUT
FROM 16 TO 19, THE NUMBER IS
20.7%.
BY RACE, WHITES 17.5%, AND YOUNG
AFRICAN-AMERICANS ARE MORE
DOUBLE THAT NUMBER AT 38%.
THAT IS AN ASTOUNDING NUMBER
>> THAT'S NEARLY 40% FOR YOUNG
BLACK TEENAGERS.
LOOK, ONE IN EVERY FOUR BLAC
YOUTH AGES 16 TO 25 IS
UNEMPLOYED RIGHT NOW
AND SO IT'S A HUGE PROBLEM
BUT IT'S NOT ONLY A PROBLEM FO
THE PRESENT.
IT'S A PROBLEM FOR THE FUTURE.
HOW YOU START OUT AS A YOUNG
WORKER, HOW YOU ENTER THE LABO
MARKET DETERMINES YOUR FUTUR
EARNINGS POTENTIAL
IF YOU'RE BLOCKED OU
OPPORTUNITIES NOW, YOU MAY B
BLOCKED OUT FOR A LIFETIME
IT'S A DRAMATIC SITUATION THAT
DEFINITELY NEEDS ATTENTION
>> AND IT COSTS THE GOVERNMENT
SORT OF IN BOTH WAYS
TAXES THAT WE DON'T GET FROM
WORKERS THAT ARE CONTRIBUTING TO
THE ECONOMY AND ALSO SOCIA
SERVICES THAT WE'RE PROVIDING TO
THE UNEMPLOYED
>> THAT'S TRUE
BUT THE GOOD NEWS HERE IS THAT
THIS IS A PROBLEM THAT I
FIXABLE.
WE KNOW THAT IF YOU GET
COLLEGE DEGREE, YOUR CHANCES O
FINDING A JOB INCREASE TODAY
DRAMATICALLY
SO ONE FIX IS TO MAKE COLLEG
AID MORE AVAILABLE
BUT FOR BLACK YOUTH, YOU STILL
SEE DOUBLE THE UNEMPLOYMEN
RATE
SO WE NEED PERHAPS PAI
INTERNSHIPS TO MAKE SURE THE
HAVE THE SAME EMPLOYMENT
OPPORTUNITIES GOING FORWARD.
>> AND WHAT ABOUT MANUFACTURIN
JOBS, HOW DOES THIS ADDRESS TH
EQUATION
>> YOU KNOW, THERE IS A HUGE
SEGMENT OF THE ECONOMY THAT IS
ACTUALLY TAKING OFF.
AND THE ONE THING THAT YOUNG
PEOPLE HAVE IN THEIR FAVOR I
THAT THEY'RE MUCH MORE MOBIL
THAN OLDER WORKERS
THEY CAN MOVE TO WHERE THE JOB
ARE AND THEY CAN ACQUIRE SKILL
THAT ARE NEEDED FOR THE ECONOM
OF THE FUTURE.
SO ANY PROGRAM THAT WE CAN GET
TO GET PEOPLE ATTACHED TO TH
LABOR MARKET BY GROWING SKILLS
AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT CAN ONLY
HELP THEIR FUTURE EMPLOYMENT
PICTURE GOING FORWARD.
>> ALL RIGHT
THANKS SO MUCH FOR JOINING US.
>> THANK YOU
>>> FINALLY TONIGHT, A PREVIEW
OF NEXT TUESDAY'S FRONT LINE,
RARE GROUND LEVEL VIEW OF TH
FIGHTING IN SYRIA.
AS RIVAL REBEL FACTIONS TAKE AIM
AT THE ASSAD REGIME AND ON
ANOTHER.
YOU HEAR A REBEL SPEAKING TO A
JOURNALIST
>> A YOUNG FIGHTER WHO WAS A
LIEUTENANT IN ASSAD'S ARMY
BEFORE DEFECTING HAS SIGNED UP
HIS REBEL BATTALION TO THE NEW
SYRIAN FRONT
IT SHOWS MOHAMMED WHAT THEY AR
UP AGAINST
>> Translator: WE'RE DRIVING
ALONG THOSE FARM ROADS TO AVOI
BEING ATTACKED
JIHADISTS ARE MORE RUTHLESS.
THEY ATTACK VILLAGES ARE
ARTILLERY AND SHELLS
IN THAT VILLAGE, THEY JUST
KILLED 15, INCLUDING WOMEN AND
CHILDREN
THEY USE CAR BOMBS AS IF WE AR
OUR MAIN ENEMY
BUT THEY ARE THE ENEMY OF TH
REVOLUTION AND FOR SYRIA AS
WHOLE.
>> THE MOST RADICAL OF THE
JIHADIST FACTIONS TO TUR
AGAINST THE OTHER REBELS IS TH
ISLAMIC STATE OF THE ROCK IN
SYRIA.
THE GROUP WANTS TO ESTABLIS
AN ISLAMIC STATE, FIGHTING
AGAINST THE REGIME AND MOR
THE REGIME AND MORE MODERATE
REBELS
IT CLAIMS AN ALLIANCE WITH A
QAEDA, BUT EVEN AL QAEDA HAS
SEVERED TIES WITH THEM
♪♪
>> JOIN US TOMORROW ON AIR AND
ONLINE
WE'LL TAKE YOU TO BANGALORE,
INDIA, A HOT SPOT FOR TECH
ENTREPRENEURS.
>> WE'D BE MAKING MUCH HIGHE
SALARY IN THE U.S.
IT'S STILL WORTH IT.
SKILLS AND OPPORTUNITY HERE IS A
ONCE IN A LIFETIME OPPORTUNITY
>> THAT'S IT FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWS HOUR WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN
THANKS FOR WATCHING.